# THE EFFECT OF SINGING AND SLIDING AS A MUSIC MEMORIZATION STRATEGY ON THE INTONATION SKILL OF COLLEGIATE TROMBONISTS

OhioLink ETD Center (Ohio Library and Information Network). Published: 2007-06-27. 1 citation.

## Authors

- Gretchen Lee Hopper (University of Cincinnati): h-index 1; 1 citation; corresponding author

## Topics

- Music Technology and Sound Studies
- Diverse Music Education Insights

---

# DATA RESULTS ………………………………………49 C GRADUATE DATA RESULTS ……………………………………….……….52

## Abstract

The purpose of this study was to begin the investigation of determining whether or not performing from memory improves intonation on trombone. One practice strategy associated with music memorization on trombone, sing and slide, was isolated from the process of music memorization and employed by 27 college undergraduate and graduate trombonists. Each subject sight-read a musical phrase (pretest), used the practice strategy three times, and performed the same musical phrase again (posttest). The pretest and posttest pitches were evaluated for frequency in Hertz. Quantitative measurements were recorded of the frequency readings which were subsequently converted to cent deviation from Equal-Tempered pitch at A=440. After participation in the performance portion of the investigation, all subjects were asked a series of questions about their experience and a qualitative measurement was made as well. Data analysis was made of the group as a whole. In addition, a comparison was made between the undergraduate group and the graduate group. Results indicate an overall improvement in intonation after employing the sing and slide technique, however not with high correlation. In addition to the above human subject research, this document includes information about human memory and music memorization on trombone.

## INTRODUCTION

Musicians who perform from memory speak of feeling free from the constraints of the printed page. The ability to hear the music mentally and make musical decisions based solely on what is heard allows for creativity in the moment. 1 Consequently, each performance may be slightly different, with new musical ideas expressed. The tradition of performing from memory began during the Romantic period when acclaimed pianists such as Clara Wieck Schumann (1819-96) and Franz Liszt (1811-16) began to publicly perform from memory. 2 Performing from memory has since become natural and expected of pianists and violinists as a majority have performed without a score since the early twentieth century. 3 ile it is considered standard performance practice for pianists, violinists, and vocalists to perform from memory, most wind players, including trombonists, typically depend on music both during practice and in performance. Students participating in the Suzuki Violin Method learn to perform music from memory, before they learn to read music, much like speaking and reading languages. In contrast, music memorization strategies are often introduced to trombonists as late as college, or even graduate school.

While music memorization is not always considered in trombone pedagogy, the need exists. Competition requirements often include performing from memory. In addition, it is becoming more common for trombonists to be called upon as soloists in the same fashion as violinists and pianists. Performing from memory is an established tradition for featured soloists with band or orchestra. Trombonists, therefore, should consider performing from memory as well. Music memorization may also enhance one's practice strategies, in particular during the rehearsal of technical passages or when developing intonation skill.

Memorization can be an overwhelming task for those not accustomed to the process.

Several memorization strategies exist that could easily be incorporated into daily practice, and ultimately the performance practice, of any trombonist. The degree to which an individual is successful at memorizing music has as much variability as any other aspect of performance. As a result of working from memory when preparing the lecture recital entitled, "The Use of Art Songs as a Pedagogical Aid to Music Memorization," performed in July 2005 at The University of Cincinnati College-Conservatory of Music, the question arose: Is the process of memorizing this music improving my intonation? As an outgrowth of the lecture, which addressed literature best suited to the initial development of the skill of music memorization, this document will present information about human memory, upon which music memory relies, and strategies trombonists may employ to develop the skill of music memorization. In addition, human subject research investigates whether or not there is a link between performing from memory and improved intonation. Sing and slide, one strategy associated with memorizing music on trombone, is employed by 27 collegiate trombone students and evaluated to determine if its use alone shows a positive correlation with improved intonation.

Sing and slide occurs when trombonists put their instrument in playing position, and move the slide to the appropriate positions, while singing the melody. By looking closely at only one memorization strategy commonly used by trombonist while learning to perform from memory, this research study will not fully answer the above question: Does performing from memory improve intonation? Showing improved intonation after employing this practice technique, whether working from memory or not, will only further substantiate any future research that attempts to link these two skills. This research study is intended to be the initial stage of answering the larger question: Can memorization improve intonation?

Figure 1 identifies the pitch classification that will be used through out the document:

C 1 C 2 C 3 C 4 C 5

Figure 1 : System of Pitch Classification

## CHAPTER TWO HUMAN MEMORY

Human memory can be considered an information processing system evolving through a series of three stages; sensory store, short-term memory, and long-term memory. foot_3 Each of these three stages processes a specific stimulus in a different way. Information from the environment, or stimulus, is collected by the first stage of human memory, called sensory store. Through pattern recognition, rehearsal and encoding, information moves through short-term memory into long-term memory store, rendering it ready for retrieval.

### Sensory Store

The first stage receives the name sensory store because information enters the brain through one of the five senses; sight, sound, smell, touch, and taste. 2 It may also enter through a possible sixth sense, kinesthesia, 3 which includes tactile, spatial, and independent movements required of any physical motor skill. 4 Sensory information is held in the brain in its original form. For example, a sound is held in auditory form. Therefore, there is a sensory register for each sense. 5 As information enters sensory store it either decays rapidly or it is deemed important enough to be retained and is processed. 6 This determination is made by a complex process called pattern recognition, where information in sensory store is compared to previously acquired knowledge. 7 en aspects of the sensory information equate in some way with meaningful concepts, a pattern is considered recognized. For example, when we see the letter A, and reference it against what we already know, we might generate the following: it is the first letter of the alphabet; it is a vowel; it represents a high academic grade; it may even register as the musical pitch A. Any of these conclusions are drawn because of the comparison of the stimulus to previously learned concepts. After important, or recognizable, information is determined (pattern recognition), it is categorized and then filtered from sensory store to short-term memory, which is stage two of the human memory system.

### Short-term Memory

There are two main differences between sensory store and short-term memory. Unlike sensory store, information in short-term memory is not stored in raw sensory form. It is stored as its recognized concept. 8 In addition, the length of time information can be retained varies between the two. In the sensory groups, information decays rapidly, in about a second, whereas 5 Roberta Klatzky, Human Memory: Structures and Processes, 2d ed. (San Fransisco: W. H. Freeman and Company, 1980), 7. in short-term memory, information can be held longer through varying processes. Information in sensory store can also be erased or masked when another stimulus is presented. 9 This is an important feature: for instance, if the visual register did not have the capability to remove the stimulus, we would see overlapping sets of visual images rather than individual scenes and the same is true for the other senses. The time spent on information that is being learned or memorized, takes place in short-term memory.

The information in short-term memory, unlike in sensory store, can stay there indefinitely through a process called rehearsal. 10 Rehearsal cycles the information over and over preventing decay. Without it, information in short-term memory decays completely and is lost just as it is in sensory store. One of two types of rehearsal takes place in short-term memory; maintenance rehearsal, or elaborate rehearsal. Maintenance rehearsal extends the time information stays in short-term memory by simple repetition. However, it is the repetitive process of elaborate rehearsal that prepares information to be stored in long-term memory. The length and strength of the short-term process directly corresponds to the strength of the long-term process. 11 in short-term memory, information can be held longer through varying processes. Information in sensory store can also be erased or masked when another stimulus is presented. 9 This is an important feature: for instance, if the visual register did not have the capability to remove the stimulus, we would see overlapping sets of visual images rather than individual scenes and the same is true for the other senses. The time spent on information that is being learned or memorized, takes place in short-term memory. The information in short-term memory, unlike in sensory store, can stay there indefinitely through a process called rehearsal. 10 Rehearsal cycles the information over and over preventing decay. Without it, information in short-term memory decays completely and is lost just as it is in sensory store. One of two types of rehearsal takes place in short-term memory; maintenance rehearsal, or elaborate rehearsal. Maintenance rehearsal extends the time information stays in short-term memory by simple repetition. However, it is the repetitive process of elaborate rehearsal that prepares information to be stored in long-term memory. The length and strength of the short-term process directly corresponds to the strength of the long-term process. 11

In addition to rehearsal, a re-organizational process called chunking occurs with information stored in short-term memory. Chunking combines smaller pieces of information into larger ones allowing for more information to be retained. It groups information together so it does not exceed the maximum number of items retainable in short-term memory, which is believed to be about seven. The seven items that short-term memory has room for is called the 9 Vernon H. Gregg, Introduction to Human Memory (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1986), 35. 10 Pashler and Carrier, 11. 11 Larry R. Squire, "Short-Term Memory as a Biological Entity," in Short Term Memory ed. Diana Deutsch and J. Anthony Deutsch (New York: Academic Press, 1975), 25-6. memory span. 12 For example, a scale is made up of seven individual notes. When it is recognized as a scale, however, it only takes up one of the seven available items.

Information passes through sensory store and is recoded into short-term memory through the processes described above, rehearsal and chunking. 13 In addition, encoding establishes the initial learning of material. A distinction can be made between three different phases of encoding: sensory, conceptual, and motor phases. 14 Sensory encoding relies on sensory stimulus.

For example, verbal and visual stimuli trigger verbal-sensory and visual-sensory encoding processes that activate recognized cognitive conceptual patterns. Motor encoding takes place when an action is carried out, motor movements are, therefore, planned and programmed. 15 This is an essential process for music memorization, as physical motor movements need to be automatic for the successful execution of memorized musical performances. Elaborate rehearsal of sensory, conceptual and motor information allows chunked material to remain intact, and in turn allows it to progress to long-term memory.

### Long-term Memory

The third storage unit for the human memory system is long-term memory, which can be considered a permanent storage center for knowledge and skill. Information is stored in one of two divisions of long-term memory called episodic or semantic. The episodic division of longterm memory records temporarily coded information in regard to specific events and life 12 Bourtchouladze, 17. 13 Henry L. Roediger, III and Melissa J. Guynn, "Retrieval Processes," in Memory, 2d ed., ed. Elizabeth L. Bjork and Robert A. Bjork (San Diego: Academic Press, 1996), 197. Johannes Engelkamp, Memory for Actions (East Sussex, UK: Psychology Press Ltd., 1998), 27. 15 Ibid. 25-6. experiences, how things appeared and when they occurred. 16 It is "conceived as being very largely sensory-perceptual in nature." 17 According to Bourtchouladze, all memories begin as episodic but only those with unique traits may be retrieved. 18 The others may undergo some form of transformation rendering them irretrievable. Episodic memory can be broken down into two smaller divisions; recollection and familiarity. 19 Yonelinas indicates that recollection is a threshold process, whereby qualitative information about previous study events is retrieved.

Familiarity is a classical signal detection process, whereby familiar items are accepted as having been studied. 20 contrast, information in the semantic division is factual and maintains its integrity upon retrieval. The information is generic and develops over time from different contexts and may be used in a variety of different settings. 21 It is not subject to change under the influence of specific events. All information stored in the semantic division requires some kind of organization and cross-reference system for a successful search of information to occur.

Organized into retrieval frameworks, associations are made between bits of data to facilitate the 16 search for information. Episodic and semantic memory systems are reliant on each other, however, researchers in this area disagree as to whether information stored begins as one or the other. 22 fective organization and association that takes place between short-term memory processing and long-term memory storage is called contextual memory and here, as well, retrieval frameworks are established. Retrieval processes are reliant upon those of encoding and storage, therefore, the extent to which these retrieval associations are made determines the effectiveness of one's ability to recall information. 23 Because of the durability of long-term memory, if all methods of processing information were successful, information will remain intact indefinitely.

The human memory system consists of two primary features: the structure of the system itself and the processes within the structure. The three structural components; sensory store, short-term memory, and long-term memory, are built-in elements of the system that use processes such as encoding, pattern recognition, rehearsal, and chunking to transform and transport information from sensory input to long-term memory.

22 Endel Tulving, "Episodic Memory and Common Sense: How Far Apart?" in Episodic Memory: New Directions in Research, ed. Alan Baddeley, Martin Conway and John Aggleton (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 275. 23 Roediger and Guynn, 197.

## CHAPTER THREE MUSIC MEMORIZATION ON TROMBONE

Music memorization is reliant on the human memory system and consists of four interrelated processes; aural memory, motor memory, visual memory, and analytical memory.

All four processes work together to encode music and its performance into long-term memory. 1 Because music is an aural art form, aural memory is considered the most important of the four. 2 1 Vining, 11. 2 Lilias Mackinnon, Music by Heart (London: Oxford University Press, 1938), 8. 3 Vining, 11. 4 Dorthy E. Bryant, “The Effect of Special Memory Instruction and Guided Analysis on the Memorization Efficiency of College Brass Players” (Ph.D. diss., University of Oklahoma, 1985), 21.

Through the processes of encoding, chunking, and rehearsal in short-term memory, an enhanced aural image is created that includes not only the sound produced, or the aural image, but the motor skill, the analytical analysis, and the visual image as well. 3 This enhanced aural image in long-term memory, where all four music memory processes continue to interact, allows the brain to interpret new sounds as they relate to the stored data and make necessary decisions instantaneously during performance. 4 In his Master of Music thesis, David Vining outlines specific pedagogical strategies to assist trombonists in memorizing music. These strategies will be discussed in association with each of the four components of music memorization. 1985), 21.

### Aural Memory and Motor Memory

Some musicians have a heightened aural ability in that at first listening, a musical passage is immediately imprinted in their brain and they can reproduce it in another form. For example, some can produce a piano reduction after hearing a symphony only once. Most musicians, however, need many exposures to a piece of music in a variety of forms to commit it to memory. An association with aural memory is important in the development of motor memory, which occurs with frequent successful repetition, after which performance becomes automatic. 5 Hearing certain pitches or intervals in connection to a physical movement-such as movement of the trombone slide or depression of the thumb-valve-will help reinforce the action to be memorized. There are several memorization strategies that reinforce both aural and motor memory. Because they are so closely linked, these two music memory processes will be discussed together.

On trombone, the harmonic series, a set of frequencies that are multiples of a single frequency called the fundamental, is present in every position. The fundamental and its harmonics, or overtones, are numbered in order ascending from the lowest pitch. Figure 1 represents the first position harmonic series based on the fundamental pitch B-flat. As the slide extends out by one position, the harmonic series is lowered a half-step. Consequently, aside from the half-step, there are not many repetitive slide patterns on the instrument. Therefore, it is important to train the aural skill in conjunction with the motor skill. Trombonists tend to rely too much on motor memory alone, which is unreliable and susceptible to interference by one of the other information gathering senses, such as the visual or aural sense. 6 One of the most useful ways of training both aural and motor skills simultaneously is by singing and sliding: foot_10 the trombone is in playing position and the performer sings in alternation, with and without music, while moving the slide to the appropriate positions. When performing without the musical score, multiple deficiencies may be exposed. First, are the melody and pitches accurately recorded in the brain? Second, is the slide pattern actually engrained in the motor movement of the arm? The motor movement of the slide is often very large, however, and there is not always a direct correlation between the motor movement and the change in pitch level. For example, the half-step movement from F 3 in first position to F-sharp 3 in fifth position (pitch classification may be found in Figure 2 ) is a large motor movement, but a small change in pitch. While use of an alternate sixth position for F 3 creates a corresponding slide action and interval distance (a one position movement, one half-step up) to F-sharp 3 in fifth position, the choice is based on other surrounding pitches and personal preference. The discrepancy between the distance and direction of the slide movement and the musical interval reinforces the importance of training the aural skill and the motor skill in conjunction with each other.

Singing and sliding can occur in a variety of ways. Alternating between phrases or subphrases is one method. Beginning each phrase by singing and sliding in alternation with playing will ensure all phrases within the process of training the aural and motor skills and memorization are both sung and played. After extended use of the sing and slide strategy, an additional application is to sing the whole piece, or a large portion of it, and check, in context, landmark pitches, or pitches that are difficult to hear. The greatest advantage to singing is that it significantly develops the aural skill. The pitches are generated in the brain. The body, specifically air flow moving past the embouchure in conjunction with the movement of the right arm, is the instrument. The trombone simply amplifies what the brain is telling the body to do.

Singing is an excellent practice strategy to develop aural skill, regardless of whether memorization is also a goal.

In addition to singing and sliding, aural skill can also be developed by mouthpiece buzzing. Mouthpiece buzzing, however, is different from playing the trombone in that the harmonic series is not present, and notes can be bent up or down allowing for movement in any intervallic increment that is free and resonant. When employed at two-to-three minutes intervals during a practice session, mouthpiece buzzing is excellent for identifying weaknesses in aural skill. There is also a device called BERP (Buzz Extension Resistance Piece) that connects the mouthpiece to the side of the leadpipe and allows for mouthpiece practice while holding the trombone in actual playing position and moving the slide. Similar to singing and sliding, the aural skill and motor movement are trained in conjunction, along with embouchure development.

This combination of aural and motor skills encourages correct motor memory.

A final emphasis in relationship to the development of these two skills, aural and motor, is the importance of repetition. It takes a high number of attentive repetitions to store something permanently in long-term memory. One of the most common mistakes, while employing repetitive practice, is thoughtless repetition. Being attentive to the task is critical to the success of any given memorization session. 8 In addition, it is important to begin with small portions, or passages, of music. Allowing the phrasing to determine how large the selection should be is appropriate, but further breakdown of the music may be necessitated by its complexity. Small portions should be combined with adjacent portions creating a larger chunk to apply accurate repetitive practice.

It is useful to start at a section other than the beginning when memorizing a piece of music. For example, using a technique called backward chaining, begin with the last phrase of a piece and memorize subsequent phrases in reverse order. It is also important to be able to begin a repetition in the middle of a memorized phrase or section. Regardless of how the sections are combined for memorization, the emphasis should be on accurate repetition. Some find it helpful to count accurate repetitions before moving on to the next measure, phrase, or group of phrases.

Pick a number that is not only realistic, but also meaningful. If the number is too large, it may be easy to lose focus, but if the number is too small, the memorization may not occur. Between five and ten accurate subsequent repetitions should be adequate for each chunk during any given memorization practice session. Each set of accurate repetitions will multiply within one practice session as sections of music, large or small, are grouped together and the counting of accurate repetitions begins again. After regular practice the overall number of accurate repetitions required to commit a piece of music to long-term memory will increase. Both aural memory and motor memory can be reinforced by the use of visual memory during short-term memory rehearsal. 9 motor memory can be reinforced by the use of visual memory during short-term memory rehearsal. 9

### Visual Memory

Visual memory transforms visual images into aural images without sound production. This is the skill that allows musicians to accurately sight-sing, or to look at a piece of music and hear it mentally. It is an important and valuable skill that must be developed. Having a visual image of the composition being memorized is useful for establishing landmarks in the music and it aids in the overall memorization of the piece. There are a variety of ways to strengthen visual memory, the first of which is to create a skeletal sketch of the music identifying various musical and structural components. 10 independently of aural memory, is photographic. Those with the extraordinary gift of photographic memory are able to see a musical score once, and repeatedly refer to it without seeing it again, as it enables one to visualize the printed page of music mentally. While there is speculation as to whether or not this skill can be developed, musicians may employ this type of memory to varying degrees. 12

Another useful addition to a skeletal sketch is the placement of musical cues outlining points in the music that may be problematic in the memorization process. These musical cues can isolate rhythm from pitch or include other musical elements such as articulation and dynamics. A skeletal sketch for the same piece can change over time for one individual and will likely be different from musician to musician. It can also be employed in conjunction with other memorization strategies including the sing and slide technique. In the music selected for this study, Liebst du um Schönheit op. 12 no. 4 by Clara Schumann, the original melody is strophic with slight rhythmic and melodic variations. Examples 1 and 2 below compare an original manuscript with one possible skeletal sketch, which includes structural, melodic, and rhythmic cues.

9 Bryant, 19. 10 Vining, "Strategies," 7.

In order to strengthen the visual image of the original, when creating a skeletal sketch, it is useful to organize it in the same way as the original to avoid working with two conflicting visual images. The skeletal sketch of a more complicated piece would include more information such as key changes, meter changes, and possibly melodic contour, and points of cadence. It may be one note, or one rhythm, but in both cases cues are handled in the same way as the skeletal information in that they are written on the page in the same location as the original.

Example 1: Schumann, Clara. Liebst du Example 2: Skeletal Sketch: Liebst du um um Schönheit op. 12 no. 4 (Transcribed for Schönheit trombone) 12 Vining, “A Trombonist’s Guide,” 12. 13 Ibid. 14 Aiello and Williamon, 175. 15 Vining, “A Trombonist’s Guide,” 13.

A second way of strengthening visual memory is to write down the piece from memory in the same layout as the original. 11 Another type of visual memory, which can exist independently of aural memory, is photographic. Those with the extraordinary gift of photographic memory are able to see a musical score once, and repeatedly refer to it without seeing it again, as it enables one to visualize the printed page of music mentally. While there is speculation as to whether or not this skill can be developed, musicians may employ this type of memory to varying degrees. foot_13 best serves the performer as preparation to memorizing music, some elements of analysis may be more apparent, such as slide action and direction, once work on the music has begun. Analysis is a significant organizational factor in long-term memory that facilitates retention and retrieval and reinforces against lapses in memory. 16

### Analytical Memory

The final form of music memory is analytical and is best employed as a preliminary activity to memorization. The rehearsal, chunking, and encoding processes of human memory allows for the continuous revision, and expansion, of long-term memory. Encoding musical knowledge analytically, prior to memorizing, allows for more associations to that information to be formed. 13 Therefore, accurate recall in the memorization process is strengthened. 14 his Master of Music thesis, Vining writes, "The analytical element of music memory provides a blueprint of form and harmonic structure and codifies all the elements involved in performance." 15 It ranges from a formal harmonic and structural analysis including the form, key areas, meter, number of phrases, major cadences, to the dynamic and rhythmic contour.

Additional forms of analysis include identifying patterns such as melodic repetition, repetitive rhythms or slide movements, whether or not there is a repetitive pitch pattern, and interval identification to strengthen the melodic or structural foundation of the piece. Although analysis best serves the performer as preparation to memorizing music, some elements of analysis may be more apparent, such as slide action and direction, once work on the music has begun. Analysis is a significant organizational factor in long-term memory that facilitates retention and retrieval and reinforces against lapses in memory. 16 e extent to which all four music memory processes and the inherent pedagogical strategies are employed determines success in memorizing music. 17 The scope of this study will be limited and addresses only the sing and slide memorization strategy. As mentioned above, the aural skills and the motor skills utilized in this strategy are very closely linked and strengthen the music memorization process when paired together. This project investigates the utilization of the sing and slide technique, as applied when memorizing music, and the effect it may have on the intonation skill of collegiate trombonists. The actual memorization skills of the subjects in this study will not be measured. 16 Bryant, 19. 17 Raleigh M. Drake, "How to Memorize Music Economically," Music Educators Journal 25, no. 6 (May 1939): 39.

## SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH

Music educators and performers continually develop and employ strategies for improving performance. Intonation is an integral component to both instruction and performance and is often addressed pedagogically on a note-by-note basis, or in isolation from the larger musical context. For the purpose of this study, intonation will refer to the ability to manipulate the pitch, and aural and performance skill, within a larger musical context. This differs from pitch discrimination, which is strictly an aural skill, and pitch matching, which combines aural and performance skills to reproduce a given pitch, one at a time or sequentially. foot_16 Knowledge of intonation as the target for evaluation could have influenced the performance of each subject and consequently the outcome of the data. To avoid drawing the subjects' attention to intonation, the title on the consent form varied from the title of the actual research, reading as "The Effect of Singing and Sliding as a Music Memorization Strategy on the Performance Skill of Collegiate Trombonists," as opposed to the actual title: "The Effect of Singing and Sliding as a Music Memorization Strategy on the Intonation Skill of Collegiate Trombonists." Therefore, subjects were told the purpose of the study was to show how singing and sliding effects their trombone performance ability and that possible benefits may include improved rhythmic accuracy, slide placement, intonation, musical phrasing, or breathing.

### Prior Research

Those studies that address intonation within a larger musical context, as opposed to pitch matching and pitch discrimination, include research regarding pitch tendencies of both experienced and inexperienced performers, 2 as well as tendencies in listener preference. 3 Also studied is the degree to which pitch choices of advanced performers adhere to specific tuning systems, and the extent of acceptability of consistent discrepancies. 4 Other research determined that the "addition of a musical context significantly affected the student's accuracy." foot_20 Also, specific feedback has been found to help improve the ability to adjust pitch more accurately. 6 n another study, "The Effectiveness of Mental Practice in Improving the Performance of College Trombonists," Stewart Ross measured a mental practice strategy that involved trombonists practicing silently, or mentally, while moving the slide. In this study he found that "a combination of mental and physical practice was found to be as useful as all-physical practice." 7 is type of mental practice, combined with the physical practice of moving the slide, is similar to the sing and slide technique to be employed in this study, however, intonation was not specifically addressed as an evaluative measure.

Although there have been many studies addressing intonation within a larger musical context, and a study employing a similar practice strategy used in this study, none link music memorization, and or the strategies associated with it, to intonation. The purpose of this study is to examine the effectiveness of singing and sliding, a component strategy for music memorization, on the intonation skill of collegiate trombonists.

### Method

A combination of qualitative and quantitative measurement tools were used to evaluate data collected. A pretest-posttest for each individual subject was employed for quantitative measurements and interview questions following the performance experience facilitated the qualitative measurements. In addition, a comparison was made between the undergraduate student group and the graduate student group regarding the change this process had on their intonation skill. Midwestern universities in the same state. Of the 27 subjects, there were 12 graduate students, 5 seniors, 5 juniors, 4 sophomores, and 1 freshman; 5 of the subjects were female, 22 were male; 5 of the subjects played bass trombone, 22 played tenor trombone; 19 were trombone performance majors, 6 were music education majors, and 2 were double majors in music education and trombone performance.

All undergraduate and graduate music majors participating in applied trombone lessons at their respective universities were eligible to participate. All participants were over the legal age of eighteen. No academic grade was contingent upon participation, although, subjects were encouraged by their university professor to participate. No subjects received any financial compensation for their participation in this study. Prior to participation, all subjects signed an informed consent document that included the title and purpose of the study, the time commitment, possible benefits, information regarding confidentiality, as well as information allowing the subject to withdraw at any point. The consent was explained to all participants individually at the time of their participation. A copy of the consent document can be found in Appendix A.

For the purposes of this study, it was not necessary for the participation of each subject to be kept private from each other; however, all data was associated with a number as opposed to a name in documenting the results, protecting the privacy of the participants' research data from the general public. For example: UG-1, UG-2, etc. for undergraduate subjects and G-1, G-2 etc. for graduate subjects. No personal information about the subject was collected. All recordings were stored initially on a laptop computer requiring a password for access known only by the researcher. All collected data remained confidential. According to guidelines established by the Institutional Review Board for Human Subject Research at the University of Cincinnati, all computer files associated with the collected data were deleted after the research was complete, data analyzed, and results written.

### Procedure

Preceding the pretest-posttest investigation, each participant tuned his/her instrument to B-flat³ at standard equal tempered pitch of A=440 using a Korg OT-12 electronic tuner. The pretest for all subjects consisted of sight-reading a musical phrase. The subjects then employed the sing and slide strategy on the same musical phrase three times. Before each sing and slide repetition the researcher gave the starting pitch of the musical phrase electronically from the Korg OT-12 electronic tuner and each subject matched the pitch vocally. The posttest consisted of a performance of the same musical phrase again on trombone. A Korg MA-30 metronome was set at quarter-note = 76 prior to the pretest and remained on until the end of the posttest. All sound recordings of the musical phrase, both performed on trombone and sung, as well as the following interview questions with subject responses were recorded on the researcher's laptop computer using the Sony Sound Forge Audio Studio 8.0 and a Sony microphone ECM-MS957.

After the performance portion was complete, the subjects were asked a series of questions related to their experience: Do you think you played better the second time? If so: What element of performance was better? If specific elements were identified: Did you find the sing and slide strategy influential on the improvement? Have you used this practice strategy before? If so: What were the reasons for employing this strategy, when you have used it in the past? If not: Can you think of any pedagogical applications for this strategy? Will you use this strategy in your future practice sessions?

The musical phrase selected for this research is the first phrase from Clara Schumann's vocal lied Liebst du um Schönheit op.12 no.4. Voice Art songs transfer very well to the trombone and facilitate expressive and lyrical musical training. Also, Liebst du um Schönheit was selected and used for this research project as an extension of the prepared lecture by the researcher, "The Use of Art Songs as a Pedagogical Aid to Music Memorization." Further substantiation of their use in this setting lies in the fact that trombonists, in addition to employing lieder in their training, frequently perform song cycles on recitals at the collegiate level as well as professionally. 8 Many are published as transcriptions foot_23 and others are professionally recorded. 10 e researcher, however, hoped that this particular phrase would not be familiar to the subjects in this study. 8 The professional journals for The International Trombone Association, International Tuba and Euphonium Association, and the International Trumpet Guild publish records of professional and collegiate recitals in each issue. These publications document performances by brass musicians, many of which include vocal literature such as lieder, opera arias, and popular Broadway tunes. In addition, the use of songs by trombonists as a lecture recital topic has been approved here 8 The professional journals for The International Trombone Association, International Tuba and Euphonium Association, and the International Trumpet Guild publish records of professional and collegiate recitals in each issue. These publications document performances by brass musicians, many of which include vocal literature such as lieder, opera arias, and popular Broadway tunes. In addition, the use of songs by trombonists as a lecture recital topic has been approved here at the College-Conservatory of Music and the University of Missouri – Kansas City Conservatory of Music: “The Transcription of Gustav Mahler’s Lieder eines fahrenden Gesellen for Trombone and Piano” submitted by Daniel Cherry, approved at CCM in June 2003; “Adapting Vocal Songs for Trombone: Pedagogical and Musical Considerations for the Trombonist,” a lecture recital presented at UMKC Conservatory of Music, April 2005. 9 Published transcriptions include those done by Eric Carlson, second trombonist of the Philadelphia Orchestra, who has transcribed Geistliches Wiegenlied and Sixteen Lieder by Johannes Brahms and Lieder eines Fahrenden Gesellen by Gustav Mahler for trombone and piano. M. Dee Stewart, the trombone professor at Indiana University, has also transcribed and published Brahms’s Vier Ernste Gesänge. 10 The following trombonists have professionally recorded vocal literature: JoDee Davis, trombone professor, UMKC Conservatory of Music, Jay Friedman, principal trombonist, Chicago Symphony Orchestra; M. Dee Stewart, trombone professor, Indiana University; Nitzan Heroz, principal trombonist, Philadelphia Orchestra; Megumi Kanda, second trombonist, Milwaukee Symphony; Mark Lawrence, principal trombonist, San Fransisco Symphony; Christian Lindberg, international trombone soloist, Don Lucas, trombone professor, Boston University.

### Data Analysis

Once recording was complete, all pitches of both the pretest and posttest were isolated from the sound wave file and analyzed for frequency in Hertz using the Praat 4.2.39 computer program. Although originally intended for speech therapy, this program works well as a measuring tool for intonation analysis. Figure 3 Equal Distribution. In this system, twelve successive half-steps within the octave are of equal size. Performing to create pure intervals required of Just Intonation requires very specific adjustments in pitch from the Equal-Tempered Scale. For example, for the interval of a major third to be an acoustically pure interval, the major third needs to be lowered by fourteen cents from Equal Temperament. Some individuals, when playing alone, have the heightened ability to hear the key center and harmonic structure in which they are playing, adjust accordingly to Just Intonation. For purposes of this study, however, data regarding each subject's experience with, and knowledge of, Equal-Tempered Pitch verses Just Intonation was not gathered. The Clara Schumann melody chosen for this experiment is transcribed for trombone from voice with piano accompaniment, which would require performance in Equal-Tempered Pitch. Therefore, while the piano accompaniment was not present for the experiment, the following data results reflect pitches analyzed in Equal-Temperament.

Hertz frequency readings for each of the eleven pitches were converted to cents using a conversion table to determine the deviation from the Equally-Tempered Scale on A=440. foot_25 Distance in cents above (sharp) and below (flat) each selected pitch, of both pretest and posttest performances determined the degree of change after employing the sing and slide music memorization strategy. For example, if a subject's pretest showed a deviation of twenty cents sharp or flat on a given pitch and the posttest showed a deviation of five cents sharp or flat on the same pitch, an improvement of 15 cents would be measured.

As discussed in the previous chapter, the sing and slide technique is employed during music memorization to link the oral and motor skills. In this case, the above excerpt and its 11 notes or note groups produced 10 pitch and slide movements. In addition to frequency reading, slide direction and distance were considered while analyzing the results. The table containing the pitch frequency readings and conversion to cents for undergraduate subjects may be found in Appendix B, and graduate subjects in Appendix C. Subject responses to the follow-up questions were grouped by question to determine if there was a trend. A transcript of the undergraduate subject interviews can be found in Appendix D, and graduate subject interviews in Appendix E.

### Results

This section will break the quantitative data into smaller, more manageable material, as well as present the qualitative results of the interview questions. Both sets of results were viewed from two different perspectives: by all subjects combined and also by group, comparing the undergraduate subjects to the graduate subjects. Two-hundred ninety-seven pitches were analyzed, 27 subjects multiplied by 11 pitches each. Two subjects performed a wrong note on Pitch 10, which created unrelated Hertz frequency readings, therefore the data for those two pitches has been excluded resulting in a total of 295 pitches analyzed.

### Quantitative

First tallied was the total number of pitches and the types of change: positive, negative, and none, by subject and by pitch. Second, the results show the degree of change as well as the number and type for each individual pitch or group of pitches. Finally considered was the slide direction and distance moved, and the size of the musical interval.

Overall evaluation of the results determined that 53% of the analyzed pitches showed a positive change, 40% showed a negative change, and 7% showed no change as reflected in Figure 4 . The graduate student group was more successful in the number of pitches showing a positive change than the undergraduate group. The posttest revealed that for the graduate group, nearly twice as many pitches improved. For the undergraduate group, however, slightly more pitches had a negative result. Figure 5 shows a comparison between all three groups. Possible explanations for this will be explored in the discussion section that follows. The statistics indicating the number of improved pitches does not take into consideration the degree of change. The number of pitches with a degree of change in increments of 5 cents, both positive and negative, is charted in Figure 6 . Each column represents data in increments of five cents. The first number within each column reflects the undergraduate students (U), the second number, the graduate students (G), and the third number, the combined total (C) in bold.

No pitches fall in the specific category identified by a blank cell. The number and degree of change data from Figure 6 above is reflected below in Figure 7 showing more clearly that most of the change, both positive and negative was largely in the 1-5 cent range, followed by the 6-10 cent range for both the undergraduate and the graduate groups. The series of 11 pitches or groups of like pitches produced 10 interval and direction changes. The selected phrase is in the key of D-flat major and began on A-flat 3 , the dominant pitch. The melodic movement was primarily stepwise with only three skips. On trombone, the half-step interval may occur between positions close together or far apart. Both occur in this musical example: from G-flat 3 in fifth position to F 3 in first position (large slide movement), and D-flat 4 in second position to C 4 in third position (small one position movement). While F 3 can also be preformed in an alternate sixth position, all but three subjects chose to play F 3 in first position. Because of the influence of the harmonic series present in any given position, a large interval change may not require a large slide movement. This, too, is seen in the musical phrase used for this experiment, from A-flat 3 to D-flat 4 . This discrepancy between the size of the motor skill and the interval to be executed contributes to the challenge of playing in tune on trombone.

U G C U G C U G C U G C U G C U G C Pitch 1 + 4 4 8 3 2 5 1 0 1 1 1 2 -4 4 8 2 1 3 Pitch 2 + 5 3 8 1 1 2 2 3 5 0 1 1 2 0 2 -2 1 3 2 3 5 1 0 1 Pitch 3 + 4 5 9 3 0 3 1 0 1 1 0 1 -5 3 8 1 3 4 0 1 1 Pitch 4 + 2 2 4 5 3 8 1 2 3 0 2 2 1 0 1 -3 1 4 3 1 4 0 1 1 Pitch 5 + 2 4 6 1 4 5 2 1 3 1 2 3 3 0 3 -3 1 4 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 Pitch 6 + 2 7 9 1 1 2 1 0 1 1 1 2 -7 2 9 3 1 4 Pitch 7 + 4 4 8 2 3 5 0 1 1 2 0 2 -3 3 6 1 1 2 3 0 3 Pitch 8 + 3 4 7 3 2 5 1 0 1 1 1 2 -3 5 8 4 0 4 Pitch 9 + 3 4 7 1 1 2 0 1 1 1 0 1 4 0 4 -4 4 8 2 0 2 0 2 2 Pitch 10 + 2 5 7 1 2 3 0 2 2 1 0 1 1 1 2 -4 0 4 2 1 3 1 0 1 2 0 2 Pitch 11 + 3 6 9 4 3 7 1 0 1 1 1 2 -3 1 4 1 0 1 2 1 3

The sequence of intervals and associated slide movements are listed in the order in which they occurred in Figure 8 . Figure 9 shows the melodic phrase with indicated slide positions.

### Position and movement Interval Pitch

Starting Placement 3 rd position A-flat 3 This however, did not hold true for the undergraduate students on any pitch. While one undergraduate participant (UG3) showed an improvement on 9 of the 11 pitches (as did one graduate student (G1), in the undergraduate group as a whole, there was not one pitch that showed as large of an improvement as C 4 and G-flat 3 did in the graduate group. The most undergraduate students showing an improvement on any of the 11 pitches was 8 out of 15 (53%).

Possible reasons for this discrepancy will be discussed in the next chapter.

### Qualitative

The subject responses to the follow-up questions produced consistent results regardless of age and experience. Twenty-four of the twenty-seven subjects felt they played better after singing and sliding the musical phrase three times. Two subjects thought it sounded about the same, and one responded, "No, but it felt better." When asked what specific musical element was improved, the most common response ( 14 ) had to do with musical phrasing in some capacity including musical shaping, or lyrical style. Most subjects simply referred to it as improved phrasing. The second most common response was breathing and airflow (11), and the third, intonation (7). Other responses included improved notes and rhythms (5), and improved tone (3).

All but three subjects felt that singing and sliding was influential on the improvements they identified. One subject specified, however, that he thought singing helped, but was not sure whether or not sliding was beneficial.

Only 5 subjects had more than a limited experience with the sing and slide technique and acknowledged using it in their own practice sessions. Six subjects identified singing only as a regular practice strategy, two of whom also used sliding, independent of singing. The subjects familiar with the sing and slide technique were exposed to it in a lesson setting by a studio instructor, but did not regularly use it on their own. Whether using it on their own or at the request of the teacher, subjects were asked to identify, and in most cases speculate, reasons for employing the sing and slide strategy. While responses were diverse, the most consistent answer related to hearing the pitches aurally before playing them, an important skill for playing well in tune and developing aural skill. Many mentioned the idea that if you can sing it, you can play it, a common catch phrase used by instrumental music instructors. Other responses included physical fatigue, kinesthetic practice, silent or mental practice, and simplification; that when you eliminate the blowing and buzzing aspect, other elements can be assessed including rhythm, slide placement and action, and most importantly, the pitches.

### Methodological Limitations

Data collected to determine the effect that singing and sliding, as a music memorization strategy, has on the intonation skill of collegiate trombonists produced some unexpected results.

It was anticipated that, after evaluation of the pretest and posttest performances, subjects would show either an improvement or no change in intonation. It was surprising that a negative change occurred to such a large extent (40% total), and that no change was limited (7% total).

This may be in part a result of the evaluative tool. Praat 4.2.39 can read frequencies at any given point in the pitch as well as by taking average readings. When analyzing the results, it was observed that a different frequency reading occurred at any given point in the sustained pitch. The ability of the software to make such specific intonation measurements is almost too sensitive to achieve a broader perspective of the overall intonation ability of each subject. The average reading did not take into consideration that a subject may have adjusted correctly for an initially out of tune pitch. For example, if a subject started sharp and appropriately adjusted down, the average reading would still be sharp. The average reading did, however, provide the most consistent means of measurement between subjects and it was for this reason it was chosen for the analysis of each pitch.

While the procedures were refined prior to the experiment, a higher positive correlation between singing and sliding and improved intonation may have taken place if subjects had sung and matched every pitch of the musical phrase. This could be done by singing, while sliding, to a pre-recorded melody, as opposed to singing and matching only the first pitch of every phrase, and continuing vocally without any further pitch reference. Another alternative may have been to

have subjects sing and slide along with a sounding written accompaniment placing the experiment as close to a realistic performance setting as possible. While each sung repetition was not evaluated for frequency in Hertz, it is likely either of the two alternatives would have had a positive influence on each subject's singing as the pitch reference would have been continuous.

Because each participant's previous ear-training experience and intonation ability has an effect on the results, it is not surprising that those with more experience were, typically, more successful. Perhaps if the sung repetitions had been more controlled, by the inclusion of a continuous pitch reference as either discussed above, there would have been more consistent results between the graduate and undergraduate student groups and stronger overall intonation results.

While employing singing and sliding as a music memorization strategy, trombonists would likely use the trombone to check pitches along the way. If memorizing is a newly developing skill, or if the piece is melodically more complicated, pitch checks may be initially more frequent than if the melody is diatonic and stepwise, as in this experiment. Those with a strong aural skill may not need as many pitch references, however, while singing and sliding, the most efficient way to check a pitch is on the trombone. While working on memorizing a specific piece, musicians may find it more efficient to use the trombone with the aid of a tuner, as opposed to another instrument such as the piano. Consequently, the above alternatives, which utilized a continuous pitch reference, were not intentionally avoided. A tuner was used in this experiment to assure that all subjects started at the same pitch level, but the alternatives listed above would assists subjects with staying on pitch vocally.

Over the course of time, as is the case with the application of any practice strategy, the employment of the sing and slide technique would likely have a larger impact on influencing intonation. Therefore, it is possible that this strategy is most effective on intonation when used extensively and with regularity, as opposed to its limited use as applied in this experiment.

Additionally, as participants in this study were not asked to memorize the phrase under evaluation, it is possible that their focus of attention to pitch accuracy might have been more

intense if this had been the case.

### Additional Data Results

The results as reported show an overall improvement in intonation after singing and sliding for the particular musical phrase examined in this study, especially for the graduate students. One must consider, however, that a large degree of positive change does not necessarily reflect an ideal result. For example, participant G7 played G-flat 3 thirty-two cents flat in the pretest and six cents sharp in the posttest. While the improvement documented is 26 cents, the posttest is still arguably out of tune. Large degrees of negative change occurred as well. For example, participant G7 played pitch 3 (A-flat³) in the pretest only three cents flat and ended in the posttest 28 cents sharp reflecting a negative change of 25 cents. A large degree of change, like those above, occurred on 3% of the total pitches analyzed (10 out of 295). Half of them were positive and half negative, and they occurred inconsistently on nearly every pitch or pitch group analyzed. In addition, very few pitches of the total 295 analyzed started in tune (8 or 2.6%) or ended in tune (19 or 6.4%), as measured in cents at Equal-Tempered Pitch of A=440.

It is also interesting to note that 12% (36) of the pitches ended up within 2 cents of being in tune, either sharp or flat. However, although these pitches were very close to being in tune, four of the pitch changes were the result of a negative change. This shows that documenting a positive change does not necessarily mean the note is in tune, but that it is closer to being in tune than the first time. Likewise, a negative change may not indicate that a pitch is terribly out of tune. The results presented in this research study are on a more macro level and do not address the details of intonation so specifically. Perhaps the use of the Praat 4.2.39 computer program for speech therapy would be put to good use on an individual basis, within a lesson, or as part of a practice session, to identify specific intonation discrepancies by degree and direction to aid improvement.

Hertz frequency readings were also analyzed within the Just Intonation System and equally inconsistent results were present. While the undergraduate student results show a slight improvement in positive change, the graduate subject results reflect a larger negative change, and overall, fewer pitches registered an improvement. Figure 10 below, compares the Equal Tempered results with the Just Intonation results. The decrease in positive change for the graduate subjects who are likely more advanced performers, may imply that when performing alone trombonists tend to stay within the Equal-Tempered Scale, especially for a major key diatonic melody such as the one chosen for this experiment.

An additional question includes: Does singing and sliding allow the instrument to get cold and consequently effect intonation? While it is possible, the frequency readings for the posttest do not indicate an overall lowered change in pitch for all subjects as may be the case if a significant change in instrument temperature occurred during the sing and slide repetitions. In addition, while all subjects were given the opportunity to warm-up before tuning at the beginning of the experiment, the extent of warm-up was not controlled. There may have been significant

variables in the temperature of each subject's instrument and each room utilized for the experiment. These variables may have been countered by each subject tuning before beginning the experiment and because the playing time of the musical phrase was quite short, limiting the change in temperature of each instrument.

### Future Research

This study was limited to analyzing the influence of just one of many strategies for memorizing a piece of music. Future research can include studying not only each specific strategy associated with strengthening the aural and motor memory, but also analyzing those used for strengthening analytical memory and visual memory as well. These research projects, smaller in scope, can be followed by a more comprehensive, long-term research project analyzing the full effect that performing from memory has on the intonation skill of collegiate trombonists.

Future sing and slide experiments might attempt to study how subject's singing accuracy influences intonation on trombone. In addition, the effect of singing and sliding on trombonist's intonation could be evaluated over a longer period of time, as when memorizing a piece of music, or perhaps at a younger age, to potentially enhance ear-training development simultaneously with the development of other performance skills. In addition, the experiment as conducted in this study, could be done with the adaptations mentioned above (singing with prerecorded material, either the single line melody or the piano accompaniment), to possibly establish another tool for strengthening the aural and motor skills of trombonists, in association with music memorization, or as an isolated strategy for working on intonation.

### Conclusion

Accurate intonation on trombone is reliant on the balance of air flow with appropriate embouchure firmness, paired with the correct slide placement based on the necessary adjustments required of the overtone series. These mechanical elements, while important, however, are subordinate to the musician's inner ear and their aural ability to discern pitch errors in order to make adjustments instantly during performance. Due to any of the above physical, pedagogical components and the ear-training skill of each musician, data of this experiment demonstrates how inconsistent playing in tune can be.

The results of this study indicate an overall positive change, therefore, it can be concluded that singing and sliding, a component strategy for music memorization on trombone, may improve one's intonation skill whether or not used in association with memorizing. Because the data does not show a strong positive correlation, however, and there are limited trends associated with the results, singing and sliding as conducted in this experiment may not appear to have a positive effect on the intonation skill of collegiate trombonists.

### Alternatives

There are no alternatives planned you do not want to participate.

### Confidentiality

For this study it is not necessary to keep your participation private from each other, however all data collected will be labeled with a letter and a number, as opposed to a name, in documenting the results. This will protect your privacy and the research data from the general public. No personal information about you will be collected. All recordings will be stored initially on the researcher's laptop computer requiring a password to access. All collected data will remain confidential. After the research is complete all computer files associated with the collected data will be deleted.

The data from the study may be published; however, you will never be identified by name.

Have you used the sing and slide strategy before? G4: Not necessarily singing it, but um, usually with a metronome, just thinking about it and moving the slide to certain positions on the beat, like chromatic orchestral excerpts and things like that.

Figure 2: Harmonic Series based on the Fundamental Pitch B-flat.

Twenty-seven trombone students participated in this study on a volunteer basis. Participants were drawn from the undergraduate and graduate trombone studios of two large 7 Stewart L. Ross, "The Effectiveness of Mental Practice in Improving the Performance of College Trombonists," Journal of Research in Music Education 33 (1985): 229.

at the College-Conservatory of Music and the University of Missouri -Kansas City Conservatory of Music: "The Transcription of Gustav Mahler's Lieder eines fahrenden Gesellen for Trombone and Piano" submitted by Daniel Cherry, approved at CCM in June 2003; "Adapting Vocal Songs for Trombone: Pedagogical and Musical Considerations for the Trombonist," a lecture recital presented at UMKC Conservatory of Music, April 2005.

represents the musical phrase used in this study.Notes requiring no change in pitch level and slide action were grouped together and an average frequency reading was measured for each individual pitch and group of like pitches.Consequently, 11 notes were analyzed and are identified by brackets.

Figure 3: Musical Phrase Identifying Analyzed Pitches

Figure 4: Overall Data Results: Positive, Negative, and No Change

Figure 6: Data Results: Degree of Change per Pitch

Figure 7: Comparison of Data Results: Degree of Change per Pitch between Groups: Undergraduate, Graduate, and Combined

Figure 8: Slide Movements and Interval Direction

Figure 9: Musical Phrase with Slide Positions

head. I've also used it with phrasing stuff, trying to get more character and intensity, and then also for intonation.PI:Do you think you'll continue to use this strategy in your future practice sessions? specific musical elements were better? UG14: Um, I think I understood the phrase better having eliminated the embouchure part it made me really focus on the pitches and what was coming out I was actually hearing. PI: Do you think the sing and slide exercise influenced the improvements you just mentioned? UG14: Certainly, yes. I didn't have to worry about the chops and I think the slide technique was a little bit more improved because I could actually focus on that by extracting the lips and I was hearing what the lips should have been doing. PI: Have you used this practice strategy before? UG14: No, I haven't. I'm usually just a singer. PI: Can you think of any pedagogical application for putting the slide action with the singing? UG14: Yeah, I think for slow things, or even for fast things and slowing them down, to be able to actually hear exactly what you are playing. I think it allows you to be able to hear harmonic things a little bit easier, hear phrases I think a bit more clearly, and it gives you a break from your chops. PI: Since you haven't used this strategy specifically, can you think of any pedagogical application for combining the slide action with singing?G3: Um, well, they need to be able to hear the pitch in their head before they can play it. Or, they will have a better chance of hitting the pitch in tune if they can hear what it's supposed to be in their head.PI:Will you use this strategy in your future practice sessions? the sound was more consistent, you know my tone. I also noticed I was singing the G-flat a little low, so but my playing is more consistent than my singing, but the singing did draw my attention to the pitch there.PI: Do you think the sing and slide activity was influential on those improvements? G4: Oh, yeah. Not only are we internalizing the beat and the tune itself, but then we're moving the slide as well. It especially improves in the students I have that have problems with slide technique.

Bourtchouladze, 27. 17Martin A. Conway, "Sensory-perceptual Episodic Memory and its Context: Autobiographical Memory," in Episodic Memory: New Directions in Research, ed. Alan Baddeley, Martin Conway and John Aggleton (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 53. Andrew P. Yonelinas, "Components of Episodic Memory: The Contribution of Recollection and Familiarity," in Episodic Memory: New Directions in Research, ed. Alan Baddeley, Martin Conway and John Aggleton (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 31. 20 Ibid., 49.

Dorthy E. Bryant, "The Effect of Special Memory Instruction and Guided Analysis on the Memorization Efficiency of College Brass Players" (Ph.D. diss., University of Oklahoma, 1 Vining, 11. 2 Lilias Mackinnon, Music by Heart (London: Oxford University Press, 1938), 8. 3 Vining, 11.

If you have any other questions about this study you may call me, Gretchen Hopper, at 513-723-1509 or Timothy Northcut at 513-556-9595. If you have any questions about your rights as a research participant, you may call the Chair of the Institutional Review Board -Social and Behavioral Sciences, at 513-558-5784. You do NOT have to participate in this study. You may choose not to participate or you may withdraw from participating AT ANY TIME. There are no consequences for choosing not to participate or to withdraw from the study. Appendix C | Graduate Data Results -1 | Voluntary Participation: Agreement: I have read this consent document. I voluntarily agree to participate in this study. I will receive a copy of this consent document for my reference. ________________________________________________ __________________ Participant Signature Date ________________________________________________ __________________ Signature of Person Obtaining Consent Date __________________________________________ Identification of Role in the Study Ab 207.65 Db 277.18 Ab 207.65 Db 277.18 Pretest Posttest Change Pretest Change Pretest Posttest Change Pretest Posttest Change 207.37 207.42 275.25 276.64 206.91 207.98 275.82 274.37 2cb 2cb none 12cb 3cb pos 9 6cb 3c# pos 3 8cb 18cb neg 10 211.83 211.47 281.65 279.56 210.58 209.04 278.38 277.06 35c# 32c# pos 3 28c# 15c# pos 13 24c# 12c# pos 12 7c# 1cb pos 6 207.6 207.58 276.02 277.97 206.69 207.35 275.89 276.59 0 1cb neg 1 6cb 5c# pos 1 8cb 2cb pos 6 8cb 4cb pos 4 207.53 206.97 277.04 276.41 206.59 206.13 275.63 274.22 1cb 6cb neg 5 1cb 5cb neg 4 9cb 4cb pos 5 10cb 19cb neg 9 207.07 205.87 276.63 277.11 205.92 206.87 275.32 277.98 5cb 15cb neg 10 3cb 0 pos 3 14cb 6cb pos 8 12cb 5c# pos 7 206.54 207.56 282.9 280.68 206.97 206.75 22.76 278.32 9cb 1cb pos 8 35c# 22c# pos 13 6cb 8cb neg 2 4c# 7c# neg 3 208.8 207.45 277.62 277.66 208.08 206.99 279.89 279.15 10c# 2cb pos 8 3c# 3c# none 4cb 5cb neg 1 17c# 12c# pos 5 207.73 206.83 277.74 275.8 206.04 205.66 276.01 277.31 1c# 7cb neg 6 4c# 13cb neg 9 13cb 17cb neg 4 7cb 1cb pos 6 205.35 207.09 277.78 277.22 206.94 207.48 277.02 277.86 19cb 5cb pos 14 4c# 0 pos 4 6cb 1cb pos 5 1cb 4c# neg 3 209.7 209.83 276.85 281.2 208.87 209.7 280.7 278.28 17cb 18cb neg 1 2cb 24c# neg 22 10c# 17c# neg 7 18c# 6c# pos 12 208.09 206.67 276.25 276.58 207.14 208.15 273.91 275.35 4c# 8c# neg 4 6cb 4cb pos 2 4cb 4c# none 21cb 11cb pos 10 207.38 207.52 276.22 276.68 206.53 207.47 277.13 276.27 2cb 1cb pos 1 6cb 3cb pos 3 9cb 1cb pos 8 0 6cb neg 6 209.32 208.77 270.7 278.98 207.91 207.99 274.65 278.43 14c# 9c# pos 5 3c# 11c# neg 8 2c# 3c# neg 1 16cb 8c# pos 8 208.89 209.43 276.25 277.6 208.11 208.41 274.14 280.52 10c# 15c# neg 5 6cb 6c# none 4c# 6c# neg 2 19cb 21c# neg 2 208.41 207.59 277.16 276.54 208.33 208 275.6 275.62 6c# 0 pos 6 0 4cb neg 4 6c# 4c# pos 2 10cb 10cb none C 261.63 Bb 233.08 Ab 207.65 Bb 233.08 Pretest Posttest Change Pretest Posttest Change Pretest Posttest Change Pretest Posttest Change 262.28 260.67 232.89 232.59 207.91 208.13 231.7 232.12 4c# 6cb neg 2 1cb 4cb neg 3 2c# 4c# neg 2 10cb 7cb pos 3 264.86 262.91 234.76 234.68 208.52 209.87 234.58 235.55 21c# 8c# pos 13 12c# 12c# none 7c# 18c# neg11 11c# 18c# neg 7 262.92 261.54 231.86 231.58 208.32 207.03 232.14 232.52 9c# 0 pos 1 9cb 11cb neg 2 6c# 5cb pos 1 7cb 4cb pos 3 262.08 261.11 231.05 231.64 207.19 206.8 230.13 230.73 3c# 3cb none 15cb 11cb pos 4 4cb 7cb neg 3 22cb 18cb pos 4 257.92 260.4 231.46 230.36 205.52 205.73 230.95 230.97 25cb 8cb pos 17 12cb 20cb neg 8 18cb 16cb pos 2 16cb 16cb none 262.15 261.2 231.4 231.07 207.1 206.16 231.12 232.22 3c# 3cb none 13cb 15cb neg 2 5cb 13cb nec 8 15cb 6cb pos 9 265.15 263.08 231.06 232.16 206.01 206.69 230.45 231.82 23c# 10c# pos 13 15cb 7cb pos 8 14cb 8cb pos 6 20cb 9cb pos 11 259.48 259.9 232.49 231.58 206.42 206.47 232.77 232.56 14cb 11cb pos 3 4cb 11cb neg 7 10cb 10cb none 2cb 4cb neg 2 262.98 261.75 233.33 233.09 208.88 207.83 232.79 233.81 9c# 1c# pos 7 2c# 0 pos 2 10c# 2c# pos 8 2cb 5c# neg 3 263.43 266.68 233.48 234.07 208.72 210.42 234.53 235.77 12c# 33c# neg 21 3c# 7c# neg 4 9c# 23c# neg 14 11c# 20c# neg 9 261.4 260.11 231.9 231.09 207.83 207.57 233.01 232.33 1cb 10cb neg 9 9cb 15cb neg 6 2c# 1cb pos 1 0 6cb neg 6 261.42 261.75 233.03 232.44 206.07 206.64 231.76 233.99 1cb 1c# none 0 5cb neg 5 13cb 9cb pos 4 10cb 1c# pos 9 262.68 262.8 228.81 233.7 207.66 207.88 232.09 233.07 7c# 8c# neg 1 32cb 5c# pos 27 0 2c# neg 2 8cb 0 pos 8 261.46 261.32 231.99 231.76 207.74 209.19 232.39 232.07 1cb 2cb neg 1 8cb 10cb neg 2 1c# 13c# neg 12 5cb 8cb neg 3 260.77 259.13 231.33 231.43 207.86 207.9 232.16 231.8 6cb 17cb neg 11 13cb 12cb neg 1 2c# 2c# none 7cb 15cb neg 8 Ab 207.65 Gb 185 F 174.61 + -o Pretest Posttest Change Pretest Posttest Change Pretest Posttest Change 211.09 206.82 190.58 187.14 175.94 175.28 28c# 7cb pos 21 52c# 20c# pos 32 13c# 7c# pos 6 6 4 1 209.79 210.12 186.24 186 174.8 175.76 18c# 20c# neg 2 12c# 9c# pos 3 2c# 10c# neg 8 6 4 1 207.4 207.35 185.91 184.42 176.97 173.97 5cb 3cb pos 2 9c# 5cb pos 4 23c# 6cb pos 17 9 2 0 206.51 207.1 184.34 183.79 174.52 174.25 9cb 5cb pos 4 6cb 11cb neg 5 1cb 4cb neg 3 4 6 1 206.99 207.48 185.42 186.59 173.52 177.13 5cb 1cb pos 4 4c# 15c# neg 9 11cb 25c# neg 14 6 4 1 206.55 208.03 185.19 187.7 173.54 174.15 9cb 3c# pos 6 2c# 25c# neg 23 11cb 5cb pos 6 5 5 1 206.03 206.04 185.21 183.81 174.89 174.8 14cb 14cb none 2cb 11cb neg 9 2cb 2cb none 6 2 3 206.5 206.04 183.77 183.2 174.37 174.63 10cb 10cb none 12cb 17cb neg 5 3cb 0 pos 3 3 6 2 207.53 207.44 186.87 186.17 174.7 175.19 1cb 2cb neg 1 17c# 11c# pos 6 1c# 5c# neg 4 7 4 0 208.88 209.66 186.82 187.32 175.4 175.59 10c# 17c# neg 7 17c# 22c# neg 5 8c# 9c# neg 1 1 10 0 208.47 208.55 185.06 186.55 176.23 175.36 7c# 7c# none 1c# 14c# neg 13 16c# 7c# pos 9 4 5 2 207.78 207.42 184.36 189.76 173.51 174.89 1c# 2cb neg 1 6cb 44c# neg 38 11cb 3c# pos 8 6 4 1 207.54 208.65 196.38 197.37 175.1 174.75 1cb 8c# neg 7 wrong note 5c# 1c# pos 1 5 5 0 208.04 208.01 182.95 184.71 173.84 175.04 3c# 3c# none 19cb 8cb pos 16 8cb 4c# pos 4 2 7 2 207.72 208.04 185.78 184.13 175.23 176.46 1c# 3c# neg 2 7c# 8cb neg 1 6c# 18c# neg 12 2 7 2 Ab 207.65 Db 277.18 Ab 207.65 Db 277.18 Pretest Posttest Change Pretest Posttest Change Pretest Posttest Change Pretest Posttest Change 207.12 207.4 280.4 275.11 206.12 205.45 274.4 277.03 4cb 2cb pos 2 20c# 13cb pos 7 13cb 18cb neg 5 17cb 0 pos 17 205.69 206.51 273.16 273.5 207.14 207.35 271.14 273.96 17cb 10cb pos 7 25cb 23cb pos 2 4cb 2cb pos 2 38cb 20cb pos 18 206.2 205.95 278.25 275.56 207.25 206.25 279.24 282.09 12cb 14cb neg 2 7c# 10cb neg 3 3cb 12cb neg 9 13c# 30c# neg 17 208.67 208.24 279.03 277.39 207.87 208.9 278.52 277.12 8c# 5c# pos 3 12c# 1c# pos 11 2c# 4c# neg 2 8c# 18c# pos 8 207.46 207.47 278.68 278.44 208.93 206.73 279.08 280.03 2cb 2cb none 9c# 8c# pos 11 11c# 8cb pos 3 12c# 18c# neg 6 206.61 207.2 275.98 274.37 206.47 205.97 274.77 275.42 9cb 4cb pos 5 8cb 18c# neg 10 10cb 14cb neg 4 15cb 11cb pos 4 207.14 206.77 276.64 275.27 207.24 211.06 279.69 276.43 4cb 7cb neg 3 3cb 12cb neg 9 3cb 28c# neg 25 16c# 5cb pos 11 206.74 206.47 275.16 275.63 206.46 205.27 274.27 276.44 8cb 10cb neg 2 13cb 10cb pos 3 10cb 20cb neg 10 18cb 5cb pos 13 208.31 209.42 274.9 277.24 207.05 207.91 278.74 277.67 6c# 15c# neg 9 14cb 0 pos 14 5cb 2c# pos 3 10c# 3c# pos 7 209.41 209.72 280.8 278.59 210.23 211.21 275.7 277.66 15c# 17c# neg 2 22c# 9c# pos 13 21c# 30c# neg 9 9cb 3c# pos 6 208.6 208.28 279.32 280.23 208.07 207.33 277.99 276.87 8c# 5c# pos 3 13c# 19c# neg 6 4c# 3cb pos 1 5c# 2cb pos 3 205.57 206.83 274.14 277.39 207.25 207.45 276.15 275.74 18cb 7cb pos 11 19cb 1c# pos 18 3cb 2cb pos 1 6cb 9cb neg 3 C 261.63 Bb 233.08 Ab 207.65 Bb 233.08 260.06 261.61 231.74 231.76 205.65 231.26 232.26 10cb 0 pos 10 10cb 10cb none 17cb pos 1 14cb 6cb pos 8 258.67 261.54 232.2 232.73 207.49 232.91 232.35 20cb 0 pos 20 8cb 3cb pos 5 1cb pos 10 1cb 5cb neg 4 252.81 262.62 232.22 232.85 206.08 231.96 231.69 59cb 7c# pos 51 6cb 2cb pos 4 13cb pos 6 8cb 10cb neg 2 261.45 260.71 233.22 232.7 208.09 233.1 233.68 1cb 6cb neg 5 1c# 3cb neg 2 4c# neg 2 0 4c# neg 4 264.56 263.39 231.8 232.25 207.19 232.03 231.48 19c# 11c# pos 8 9cb 6cb pos 3 4cb pos 6 8cb 12cb neg 4 259.44 259.97 232.02 231.26 Pretest Posttest Change Pretest Posttest Change Pretest Posttest Change Pretest Posttest Change 205.47 18cb 206.34 11cb 205.42 19cb 207.87 2c# 206.05 10cb 207.17 UG1 UG1 UG1 G1 G1 | UG2 UG2 UG2 G2 G2 | UG3 UG3 UG3 G3 G3 | UG4 UG4 UG4 G4 G4 | UG5 UG5 UG5 G5 G5 | UG6 UG6 UG6 G6 G6 | UG7 UG7 UG7 G7 | UG8 UG8 UG8 G8 | UG9 UG9 UG9 G9 | UG10 UG10 UG10 G10 | UG11 UG11 UG11 G11 | UG12 UG12 UG12 G12 | UG13 UG13 UG13 | UG14 UG14 UG14 | UG15 UG15 UG15

## SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
### References

The Science and Psychology of Music Performance: Creative Strategies for Teaching and Learning Rita Aiello Aaron Williamon Memory Aiello, Rita and Aaron Williamon. "Memory." In The Science and Psychology of Music Performance: Creative Strategies for Teaching and Learning, ed.

Richard Parncutt Gary E Mcpherson 2002 Oxford University Press Oxford Richard Parncutt and Gary E. McPherson, 167-81. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.

The Concept of Episodic Memory Alan Baddeley Episodic Memory: New Concepts in Research Alan Baddeley Martin Conway John Aggleton Oxford Oxford University Press 2002 Baddeley, Alan. "The Concept of Episodic Memory." In Episodic Memory: New Concepts in Research, ed. Alan Baddeley, Martin Conway and John Aggleton, 1-10. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.

Memory and Instruction David Baine 1986 Educational Technology Publications Englewood Cliffs, N.J. Baine, David. Memory and Instruction. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Educational Technology Publications, 1986.

Rusiko Bourtchouladze Memories are Made of This: How Memory Works in Humans and Animals New York Columbia University Press 2003 Bourtchouladze, Rusiko. Memories are Made of This: How Memory Works in Humans and Animals. New York: Columbia University Press, 2003.

The Effect of Special Memory Instruction and Guided Analysis on the Memorization Efficiency of College Brass Players Dorothy E Bryant 1985 University of Oklahoma Ph.D. diss Bryant, Dorothy E. "The Effect of Special Memory Instruction and Guided Analysis on the Memorization Efficiency of College Brass Players." Ph.D. diss., University of Oklahoma, 1985.

Sensory-Perceptual Episodic Memory and its Context: Autobiographical Memory Martin A Conway Episodic Memory: New Directions in Research Conway, Martin A. "Sensory-Perceptual Episodic Memory and its Context: Autobiographical Memory." In Episodic Memory: New Directions in Research, ed.

Alan Baddeley Martin Conway John Aggleton 2002 Oxford University Press Oxford Alan Baddeley, Martin Conway and John Aggleton, 53-70. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.

How to Memorize Music Economically Raleigh M Drake Music Educators Journal 25 6 May 1939 Drake, Raleigh M. "How to Memorize Music Economically." Music Educators Journal 25, no. 6 (May 1939): 38-39.

Memory for Actions Johannes Engelkamp 1998 Psychology Press Ltd East Sussex, UK Engelkamp, Johannes. Memory for Actions. East Sussex, UK: Psychology Press Ltd., 1998.

Intonational Performance and Perception of Ascending Scales John M Geringer Journal of Research in Music Education 26 1978 Geringer, John M. "Intonational Performance and Perception of Ascending Scales." Journal of Research in Music Education 26 (1978): 32-40.

An Investigation of Tuning Performance and Perception of String Instrumentalists John M Geringer Anne C Witt Bulletin of the Council for Research in Music Education 85 1985 Geringer, John M., and Anne C. Witt. "An Investigation of Tuning Performance and Perception of String Instrumentalists." Bulletin of the Council for Research in Music Education 85 (1985): 90-101.

Introduction to Human Memory Vernon H Greg 1986 Routledge and Kegn Paul Oondon Greg, Vernon H. Introduction to Human Memory. Oondon: Routledge and Kegn Paul, 1986.

Human Memory : Exploration and Application Karl Hamberlandt 1999 Allyn & Bacon Boston, MA Hamberlandt, Karl. Human Memory : Exploration and Application. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon, 1999.

String Instrument Intonation in Upper and Lower Registers: The Effects of Accompaniment Vincent J Kantorski Journal of Research in Music Education 34 1986 Kantorski, Vincent J. "String Instrument Intonation in Upper and Lower Registers: The Effects of Accompaniment." Journal of Research in Music Education 34 (1986): 200-10.

An Examination of the Intonation Tendencies of Wind Instrumentalists Based on their Performances of Selected Harmonic Intervals Brant Karrick Journal of Research in Music Education 46 1998 Karrick, Brant. "An Examination of the Intonation Tendencies of Wind Instrumentalists Based on their Performances of Selected Harmonic Intervals." Journal of Research in Music Education 46 (1998): 112-27.

Roberta L Klatzky Human Memory: Structures and Processes San Fransisco W.H. Freeman and Company 1975 2 Klatzky, Roberta L. Human Memory: Structures and Processes, 2d. ed. San Fransisco: W.H. Freeman and Company, 1975.

Lilias Mackinnon Music by Heart London Oxford University Press 1938 Mackinnon, Lilias. Music by Heart. London: Oxford University Press, 1938.

The Effect of Melodic Context, Tuning Behaviors, and Experience on the Intonation Accuracy of Wind Players Steven J Morrison Journal of Research in Music Education 48 2000 Morrison, Steven J."The Effect of Melodic Context, Tuning Behaviors, and Experience on the Intonation Accuracy of Wind Players." Journal of Research in Music Education 48 (2000): 39-51.

Intonation Steven J Morrison Janina Fyk The Science and Psychology of Music Performance: Creative Strategies for Teaching and Learning Morrison, Steven J., and Janina Fyk. "Intonation." In The Science and Psychology of Music Performance: Creative Strategies for Teaching and Learning, ed.

Richard Parncutt Gary E Mcpherson 2002 Oxford University Press Oxford Richard Parncutt and Gary E. McPherson, 183-97. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.

Structures, Processes, and the Flow of Information Harold Pashler Mark Carrier Memory Elizabeth L Bjork Robert A Bjork San Diego Academic Press 1996 2 Pashler, Harold, and Mark Carrier. "Structures, Processes, and the Flow of Information." In Memory, 2d ed., ed. Elizabeth L. Bjork and Robert A. Bjork, 3-29. San Diego: Academic Press, 1996.

Effect of Frequency, Timbre, Experience, and Feedback on Musical Tuning Skills John R Platt Ronald J Racine Perception and Psychophysics 38 6 1985 Platt, John R., and Ronald J. Racine. "Effect of Frequency, Timbre, Experience, and Feedback on Musical Tuning Skills." Perception and Psychophysics 38, no. 6 (1985): 543-53.

Retrieval Processes Henry L Roediger Melissa J Iii Guynn Memory 2d ed. Roediger, Henry L., III, and Melissa J. Guynn. "Retrieval Processes." In Memory, 2d ed., ed.

Elizabeth L Bjork Robert A Bjork 1996 Academic Press San Diego Elizabeth L. Bjork and Robert A. Bjork, 197-236. San Diego: Academic Press, 1996.

The Effectiveness of Mental Practice in Improving the Performance of College Trombonists Stewart L Ross Journal of Research in Music Education 33 1985 Ross, Stewart L. "The Effectiveness of Mental Practice in Improving the Performance of College Trombonists." Journal of Research in Music Education 33 (1985): 221-31.

The Great Pianists Harold C Schonberg 1965 Victor Gollancz, Ltd London Schonberg, Harold C. The Great Pianists, London: Victor Gollancz, Ltd., 1965.

Short-Term Memory as a Biological Entity Larry R Squire Short Term Memory Diana Deutsch J Anthony Deutsch New York Academic Press 1975 Squire, Larry R. "Short-Term Memory as a Biological Entity." In Short Term Memory, ed. Diana Deutsch and J. Anthony Deutsch, 2-40. New York: Academic Press, 1975 memory span. 12 For example, a scale is made up of seven individual notes. When it is recognized as a scale, however, it only takes up one of the seven available items. Information passes through sensory store and is recoded into short-term memory through the processes described above, rehearsal and chunking. 13 In addition, encoding establishes the initial learning of material. A distinction can be made between three different phases of encoding: sensory, conceptual, and motor phases. 14 Sensory encoding relies on sensory stimulus. For example, verbal and visual stimuli trigger verbal-sensory and visual-sensory encoding processes that activate recognized cognitive conceptual patterns. Motor encoding takes place when an action is carried out, motor movements are, therefore, planned and programmed. 15 This is an essential process for music memorization, as physical motor movements need to be automatic for the successful execution of memorized musical performances. Elaborate rehearsal of sensory, conceptual and motor information allows chunked material to remain intact, and in turn allows it to progress to long-term memory.

Memorizing Chinese Poems? Eric Steiner American Music Teacher 3 4 November/December 1954 Steiner, Eric. "Memorizing Chinese Poems?" American Music Teacher 3-4 (November/December 1954): 12-14.

In Tune or not? A Study of Fundamental Frequency in Music Practice Johan Sundberg Tiefenstruktur der Musik C Dahlhaus M Krause Berlin 1982 Technical University of Berlin Sundberg, Johan. "In Tune or not? A Study of Fundamental Frequency in Music Practice." In Tiefenstruktur der Musik, ed. C. Dahlhaus and M. Krause, 69-97. Berlin: Technical University of Berlin, 1982.

Episodic Memory and Common Sense: How Far Apart? Endel Tulving Episodic Memory: New Directions in Research Tulving, Endel. "Episodic Memory and Common Sense: How Far Apart?" In Episodic Memory: New Directions in Research, ed.

Alan Baddeley Martin Conway John Aggleton 2002 Oxford University Press Oxford Alan Baddeley, Martin Conway and John Aggleton, 269-287. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.

David Vining A Trombonist's Guide to Music Memorization 1992 Bowling Green State University M.M. thesis Vining, David. "A Trombonist's Guide to Music Memorization." M.M. thesis., Bowling Green State University, 1992.

Strategies for Music Memorization National Association of College Wind and Percussion Instructors 50 fall 2001 ________. "Strategies for Music Memorization." National Association of College Wind and Percussion Instructors 50 (fall 2001): 3-9.

The Effect of Accidentals, Scale Degrees, Direction, and Performer Opinions on Intonation Cornelia Yarbrough Dana Ballard Update: Applications of Research in Music Education 8 2 1990 Yarbrough, Cornelia, and Dana Ballard. "The Effect of Accidentals, Scale Degrees, Direction, and Performer Opinions on Intonation." Update: Applications of Research in Music Education 8, no. 2 (1990): 30-8.

Effect of Knowledge of Directional Mistunings on the Tuning Accuracy of Beginning and Intermediate Wind Players Cornelia Yarbrough Brant Karrick Steven J Morrison Journal of Research in Music Education 43 1995 Yarbrough, Cornelia, Brant Karrick, and Steven J. Morrison. "Effect of Knowledge of Directional Mistunings on the Tuning Accuracy of Beginning and Intermediate Wind Players." Journal of Research in Music Education 43 (1995): 232-41.

Components of Episodic Memory: The Contribution of Recollection and Familiarity Andrew P Yonelinas Episodic Memory: New Directions in Research Yonelinas, Andrew P. "Components of Episodic Memory: The Contribution of Recollection and Familiarity." In Episodic Memory: New Directions in Research, ed.

Alan Baddeley Martin Conway John Aggleton 2002 Oxford University Press Oxford Alan Baddeley, Martin Conway and John Aggleton, 31-52. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.

A Table Relating Frequency to Cents: Deviation form the Equally Tempered Scale on A-440 Cycles Per Second: Auxiliary Tables R W Young UG1 1952 G. G. Conn Limited Elkhart, IN I just have to remember to do it. UG2 PI: Do you think you played better the second time around? UG2: Yeah, probably. I didn't really put much into the phrasing. PI: What specific musical elements were better? UG2: Um. I don't know I'm not really putting my finger on anything. PI: Have you used this practice strategy before? UG2: No, I haven't. PI: Since you haven't used this strategy much, can you think of any pedagogical application for combining the slide action with singing? UG2: I think it would be helpful for, um. I like to use singing to get phrasing ideas. I think the best way to figure out how to phrase something is to sing it. PI: Do you think you would use this practice strategy in the future? UG2: Yeah, possibly. UG3 PI: Do you think you played better the second time around? UG3: Um, there were some technical issues, but I played a lot more attention to the phrase. PI: Do you think the sing and slide strategy influenced that specific improvement? UG3: Um, I think the first time I was singing I was kind of surprised at my voice because it was a little waggly, but the concept was there. I think that really helped me. PI: Have you used this practice strategy before? UG3: No I haven't. Young, R. W. A Table Relating Frequency to Cents: Deviation form the Equally Tempered Scale on A-440 Cycles Per Second: Auxiliary Tables. Elkhart, IN: G. G. Conn Limited, 1952. UG1: Yes, I just have to remember to do it. UG2 PI: Do you think you played better the second time around? UG2: Yeah, probably. I didn't really put much into the phrasing. PI: What specific musical elements were better? UG2: Um. I don't know I'm not really putting my finger on anything. PI: Have you used this practice strategy before? UG2: No, I haven't. PI: Since you haven't used this strategy much, can you think of any pedagogical application for combining the slide action with singing? UG2: I think it would be helpful for, um. I like to use singing to get phrasing ideas. I think the best way to figure out how to phrase something is to sing it. PI: Do you think you would use this practice strategy in the future? UG2: Yeah, possibly. UG3 PI: Do you think you played better the second time around? UG3: Um, there were some technical issues, but I played a lot more attention to the phrase. PI: Do you think the sing and slide strategy influenced that specific improvement? UG3: Um, I think the first time I was singing I was kind of surprised at my voice because it was a little waggly, but the concept was there. I think that really helped me. PI: Have you used this practice strategy before? UG3: No I haven't.

UG5 PI: Do you think you played better the second time around? UG5 What specific musical elements were better? UG5: Um, rhythmically. Definitely. Keeping it more in time, and the phrasing. Using more expression. PI: Do you think the sing and slide exercise influenced the improvements you just mentioned? UG5: Yes. I think it would have improved the second time anyway, but yes, it helped. PI: Have you used this practice strategy before? UG5: Yes. PI: When you practice with singing and sliding, why are you employing it? UG5: To practice musicality and expression, and sometimes to practice getting the feel in my hands, especially if I'm tired. PI: Since you already use this strategy, will you continue to use this strategy in your practice sessions? UG5: Yeah. I actually just read an article in ITA that surveyed professional performers and teachers about their practice habits and one of the things they talked about was singing. UG6 PI: Do you think you played better the second time around? UG6: Probably yeah. PI: What specific musical elements were better? UG6: I think the phrases were a lot better. PI: Do you think the sing and slide activity was influential on that improvement? UG6: Probably, a small bit. I just wasn't very good the first time. PI: Have you used this practice strategy before? UG6: I've used singing and I've used sliding, but not together. PI: When you have employed singing, what were the reasons behind it? UG6: To get a better sense of vocalise style, like how a singer would sing it. PI: And, how about the sliding? Why did you use that strategy? UG6: To get the positions and make sure they're engrained in my head. PI: Can you think of any pedagogical applications for putting the two together? UG6: It takes out a step. It's multi-tasking, more like playing. It gets the pitches in your head while moving the slide and it's been said that if you have a slide position you have more of a knowledge of that's where my arm is so this is what note should come out. So if you're in third position, this is how it's supposed to sound. It combines muscle memory with the pitches. PI: Do you think you'll use this particular UG5 PI: Do you think you played better the second time around? UG5: Yes. PI: What specific musical elements were better? UG5: Um, rhythmically. Definitely. Keeping it more in time, and the phrasing. Using more expression. PI: Do you think the sing and slide exercise influenced the improvements you just mentioned? UG5: Yes. I think it would have improved the second time anyway, but yes, it helped. PI: Have you used this practice strategy before? UG5: Yes. PI: When you practice with singing and sliding, why are you employing it? UG5: To practice musicality and expression, and sometimes to practice getting the feel in my hands, especially if I'm tired. PI: Since you already use this strategy, will you continue to use this strategy in your practice sessions? UG5: Yeah. I actually just read an article in ITA that surveyed professional performers and teachers about their practice habits and one of the things they talked about was singing. UG6 PI: Do you think you played better the second time around? UG6: Probably yeah. PI: What specific musical elements were better? UG6: I think the phrases were a lot better. PI: Do you think the sing and slide activity was influential on that improvement? UG6: Probably, a small bit. I just wasn't very good the first time. PI: Have you used this practice strategy before? UG6: I've used singing and I've used sliding, but not together. PI: When you have employed singing, what were the reasons behind it? UG6: To get a better sense of vocalise style, like how a singer would sing it. PI: And, how about the sliding? Why did you use that strategy? UG6: To get the positions and make sure they're engrained in my head. PI: Can you think of any pedagogical applications for putting the two together? UG6: It takes out a step. It's multi-tasking, more like playing. It gets the pitches in your head while moving the slide and it's been said that if you have a slide position you have more of a knowledge of that's where my arm is so this is what note should come out. So if you're in third position, this is how it's supposed to sound. It combines muscle memory with the pitches. PI: Do you think you'll use this particular combination of singing and sliding in your future practice sessions? UG6: I could try.