## SCORE ANALYZER: AUTOMATICALLY DETERMINING SCORES DIFFICULTY LEVEL FOR INSTRUMENTAL E-LEARNING

Véronique Sébastien, Henri Ralambondrainy, Olivier Sébastien, Noël Conruyt IREMIA - Laboratoire d'Informatique et de Mathématiques, EA2525 University of Reunion Island, Saint-Denis, Reunion (FRANCE) veronique.sebastien/henri.ralambondrainy/olivier.sebastien /noel.conruyt@univ-reunion.fr

ABSTRACT Nowadays, huge sheet music collections exist on the Web, allowing people to access public domain scores for free. However, beginners may be lost in finding a score appropriate to their instrument level, and should often re ly on themselves to start out on the chosen piece. In this instrumental e-Learning context, we propose a Score Analyzer prototype in order to automatically extract the difficulty level of a MusicXML piece and suggest advice thanks to a Musical Sign Base (MSB). To do so, we first review methods related to score performance information retrieval. We then identify seven criteria to characterize technical instrumental difficulties and propose methods to extract them from a MusicXML score. The relevance of these criteria is then evaluated through a Principal Com ponents Analysis and compared to human estimations. Lastly we discuss the integration of this work to @-MUSE, a collaborative score annotation platform based on multimedia contents indexation. 1. INTRODUCTION In the context of knowledge transmission, musical know how presents specific features to be efficiently preserved and shared. Indeed, to play correctly and nicely an in strument, one should at the same time acquire physical (gestures, hands position, listening) and intellectual (mu sic theory, score reading) skills. As such, conceiving a service to preserve, transmit and share musical know-how is a complex issue, as we deal with both music hearing faculties and artistic gestures production. While more and more instrumental e-Learning services are proposed to music amateurs (Garage Band 1 , Song2See 2, iScore 3), few of them aims at sharing instru mental know-how on a large scale. Therefore, we propose to build a Musical Sign Base (MSB), grounded on the

1 http://www.apple.com/fr/ilife/garageband/ 
2http://www.songquito.com/index.php/en/ 
3http://rcmusic.ca/iscore-home-page 

Sign Management methodology [1], in order to collect annotated performances (personal interpretations or stances) each related to a given musical work (class). This base can be used to compare various performances from music experts or students, and also to dynamically build new music lessons from the available content. To allow musicians to feed this base, we designed a colla borative score annotation platform: @-MUSE (@nnotation platform for MUSical Education). It allows users to illustrate abstract scores (notation) with dia content depicting advices, exercises or questions dexed on the piece (annotation) [2]. However, learners may want to be guided in their choice of a new piece to learn, and to obtain rapidly some starting recommenda tions to begin learning it on appropriate bases, before any teacher can annotate the piece. That is why, annotations created previously on similar pieces can be useful in this frame in order to depict basic information on the new piece. To do so, we present in this paper a Score Analyzer prototype in order to automatically identify remarkable parts in a musical piece, from a performer viewpoint. For the time being, we choose to concentrate on the piano for several reasons: the authors are pianists and work in col laboration with piano and guitar experts from music con servatories, but also, the piano repertoire is extremely rich, both historically and technically. Indeed, we want our system to be able to manage not only basic know how, but also advanced one, on virtuoso instrumental works. In the first part of this work, we explore existing me thods to automatically extract musicological and technic al information from a digital score. For this knowledge to be relevant to performers, we base this study on the needs of a pianist who would discover a new piece, following the process generally used by piano teachers to introduce a new work to their students. We then propose seven cri teria to characterize technical instrumental difficulties and give methods to extract them from a MusicXML score. The relevance of these criteria is then evaluated through a Principal Components Analysis (PCA) and compared to human estimations. Lastly we discuss the integration of this work to @-MUSE, our collaborative score annotation platform.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. © 2012 International Society for Music Information Retrieval

2. MUSIC EDUCATION AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE The learning of an instrument generally consists in assi milating a basic repertoire to progress while enjoying playing real artistic compositions instead of only repeat ing scales mechanically, which can be boring and demo tivating. Most of these technical points are directly dealt in the context of the considered pieces. This is why it is essential to select an appropriate corpus for the learner, and to quickly detect remarkable technical points in or der to assimilate them, and then concentrate on higher level considerations, such as expression and musicality. Pointing such features is generally the job of the teacher, until the learner is able to detect them by himself (self regulation). In the frame of the @-MUSE project, our aim is to assist musicians in this procedure using descriptive logics adapted to each piece genre (baroque, classical, romantic, etc). Figure 1 details a generic model to in stance each descriptive logic. It is derived from how teachers introduce new pieces to their students [4]. To extract the different necessary information, we use the standard MusicXML format [3] which describes scores logically, staff by staff, measure by measure, and lastly note by note (Figure 2). As shown on Figure 1, the first step in our model consists in placing the musical work in its context (composer, period, form metadata). In our frame, it can be done using metadata such as title or composer, present in the MusicXML file. In addition, specialized music web services such as MusicBrainz 1 or Last.fm 2 can be queried to obtain more metadata to illustrate the piece (for instance, a portrait and biography of the composer, or an indication about the piece style). Several performances of the piece can be retrieved from video sharing websites in order to get a glimpse of how the piece should sound. The second step is to analyze the global form of the piece. Most information about it exists within the piece title (i.e.: Sonata, Fugue, etc.). The challenge is thus to detect the main parts of the piece which characterize its form (i.e.: Introduction, part 1, part 2, Coda). Indeed, grasping its structure is essential to performers, as each part may sound totally differently (especially on ad vanced pieces). In our frame, this also enables a better indexation for annotations. To achieve that goal, we pro pose to rely on some of the characteristic tags within the MusicXML file. Indeed, score symbols such as direction texts (e.g. “meno mosso”), tempo and key modifications, double bars generally indicate the beginning of a new part within the piece. While this method seems quite "naïve", it gives acceptable results most of the time. Some excep tions may occur, especially on contemporary pieces, which present unconventional structures. After indicating main parts of the piece, the teacher generally brings the attention of the learner on the re markable rhythmic or harmonic patterns the piece is build on (if any), leading to more technical and detailed prac tice. In our work, discovering predefined patterns such as scales, arpeggios or trills may be done using a memory window of successive intervals. Indeed, scales will cor respond to sequences of ascendant or descendant seconds, arpeggios to sequences of triples, etc. Each detected pat tern can then be linked to a generic annotation explaining how to work on it. However, detecting more complex and

1http://musicbrainz.org, visited on the 10/04/2012. 
2http://www.last.fm, visited on the 10/04/2012. 

Figure 1. Generic model for musical pieces descriptive logics

Figure 2. Musical score logical structure both specify the global level of the piece, and to detect its technical difficulties measure by measure. To do so, we propose in what follows seven criteria to evaluate a piano piece difficulty.

non-determined patterns remains a challenge, as it does not only involve rhythms and pitch features, but also po lyphonic ones. Moreover, it does not present a unified definition of “similarity”. Two fragments can be consi dered as “similar”, without having the same pitches, but by possessing similar intervals (transposition). Several works exist on Musical Pattern Discovery. Among them, [5] presents a method based on time windows and define different types of patterns (abstract patterns, prefixes, pat terns network). Still, each suggestion given by our system calls for a validation by a music professional. In order to semantically annotate the detected struc tures, we need a musical form ontology. While the Music Ontology [6] is particularly fitted to the music industry, it lacks some concepts to be effective in music education. More specialized ontologies exist, such as the Symbolic Music Ontology (allowing to manipulate Voices and Mo tifs concepts), the Chord Ontology or the Neuma ontolo gy (for Gregorian Music) [7], however, a real form tax onomy has yet to be built to manage the manipulation of concepts such as Sonata, Fugue, Theme or Coda. The last step of our introduction lesson is to underline specific difficulties of the piece. This will allow us to

3. CRITERIA DEFINITION AND RETRIEVAL In Table 1, we propose seven criteria affecting the level of a piece for the piano and detail how they can be estimated from a MusicXML file. These criteria were de fined on the base of pianists experiences, both profes sionals and amateurs. They may be applied to other in struments with some adaptations (see Instruments column in Table 1). Globally, a piano piece difficulty depends on its tempo, its fingering, its required hand displacements, as well as its harmonic, rhythmic and polyphonic fea tures. Although we define each criteria separately, they affect each other in a complex manner. In particular, fin gerings remain hard to extract from a score, as most Mu sicXML files do not contain this information. Indeed, while other criteria reside in the basic notation layer (notes pitch and duration), the fingering is from the anno tation layer and directed at humans only (human perfor mance information).

| | Performance diffi culty criterion | Definition | MusicXML implementation | Instruments | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | | | | | |
| | Playing speed Fingering Hand Displacement Polyphony Harmony Irregular Rhythm Length | The required fingers velocity to play the piece. Depends on the tempo and the shortest significant note value (i.e. a piece present ing a high tempo may contain only long values, and conversely, a piece with a low tempo may contain groups of short notes thus increasing the required fingers agility for the players) Fingering: choice of finger and hand position on various instru ments. Different notations exist in piano: 1 = thumb, 2 = index finger, 3 = middle finger, etc.) Cost functions are used on intervals to extract the general finger ing difficulty level See [8][8][9] for more detail. Ratio of hands displacements greater than an octave (12 semi tones). Depends on the duration of the interval: if the duration exceeds 2 beats (i.e. 2 quarters in 4/4, 2 eights in 6/8), the dis placements is not considered as difficult. The difficulty degree of the displacement evolves with its size (in pitch), its duration and its fingering Chords ratio (aggregate of musical pitches simultaneously tacked) Polyphonic difficulties may increase with the number of notes played at the same time and their fingerings. Simultaneous voices (in a Fugue for instance) constitute special cases of polyphonic difficulties to treat. Ratio of differences from the piece main tonality. Characterized by the amount of accidental alterations. Ratio of irregular polyrhythms (simultaneous sounding of two or more independent rhythms). Example: synchronizing a triplets over duplets The number of pages of the score. May also be measured in bars number to avoid dependency to the page layout. Table 1. Performance difficulty criteria in piano practice | elements Tempo attribute in element within each according to the instrument. (ex: element Combined gap > 12 and gap < 2 beats at element and new-page attributes or elements | element All All, requires adap tations in con straints and costs functions (some instruments do not use thumbs) elements where All, requires adap tations depending on the instrument morphology All (except for mo nophonic ments, such as the flute) elements All element All (except for mo nophonic instru ments) All | instru |

Several works present methods to automatically de duce fingerings on a given musical extract for piano ([8][9][10]). Most of them are based on dynamic pro gramming. All possible fingers combinations are generat ed and evaluated, thanks to cost functions. The latter are determined by kinematic considerations. Some functions, even consider the player’s hand size to adjust its results. Then, expensive (in term of effort) combinations are sup pressed until only one remains, which will be displayed as the resulting fingering. While the result often differs from a fingering determined by a human expert, it re mains largely playable and exploitable in the frame of an educational usage. However, few algorithms can process polyphonic extracts, and many other cases are ignored (i.e., left hand, finger substitutions, black and white keys alternation). Even if more work is needed on this issue, the use of cost functions remains relevant as it is close from the process humans implicitly apply while working on a mus ical piece. Therefore, we use this method in our Score Analyzer prototype to translate extracted criteria into dif ficulty indicators (see part 5). But to do so, we need to study how our criteria discriminate a corpus of piano pieces, both objectively (through a components analysis) and subjectively (based on pianists experience). 4. PIANO SCORES CORPUS CLUSTERING To study how our criteria discriminate scores, we rea lized a PCA on a sample of fifty piano pieces (Figure 5). The pieces were selected to be representative of a classic al piano cursus in a French Music Conservatory. Most pieces concern intermediate to advanced players, fewer target beginners and virtuosi. Most MusicXML files were retrieved from online music notation communities such as MuseScore.com, Noteflight or the Werner Icking Music Archives. Some were generated from PDF files using the SmartScore™ OCR software. The criteria defined in Table 1 were extracted on each piece. Displacements, chords and harmonic characteris tics are distinguished whether they occur on the right (RH) or the left hand (LH). Fingerings were not exploited for the time being as work is in progress to deduce them from MusicXML files (see part 3). Our analysis thus counts 9 numeric variables (Figure 4), and 1 nominal va riable (composer). Each ratio is calculated on the base of the total number of notes (e.g. harmonic criteria), or the total number of hands positions (e.g. displacements, chords) within the piece. A displacement is thus defined as a pair composed of two successive hand positions. A correlations study (Figure 3) points out some links between variables. Some are musically natural (i.e. har monyLH and harmonyRH, harmonic characteristics con cern both hands). We also note a strong correlation (81%) between chordsLH and displacementsLH. This value could characterize accompaniments presenting an alterna tion of a low-pitched bass and a middle or high-pitched chord, thus inducing regular large displacements and chords at the left hand (ragtime, waltz). Lastly, the piece length can be linked to its playing speed, which characte rizes advanced and virtuosi works, demand ing an important fingers velocity on a long dura tion (stamina). The PCA then gives an optimal projection of each piece in the 2D space of the first principal components. Figure 5 presents this projection as well as the three classes detected by the analysis. This clustering was rea lized through a hierarchical clustering using the Ward’s method [11] on the first few principal components. The resulting tree is then cut according to its corresponding indices, in order to find an appropriate number of clus ters. Lastly, this clustering is consolidated using a k means algorithm. The first interpretation of these three classes validates the relevance of our criteria to estimate the difficulty level of a piano piece. Indeed, we notice that at least two of the classes naturally regroup pieces according to their level (class 1 and 2). A further observa tion backed by a Student test (variable means compari sons between the whole population and the clusters) gives a better interpretation of the classes. Class 1 mostly re groups pieces addressed to beginners (Kinderszenen, Schumann’s Choral) and to intermediate musicians (Bach’s Invention, Sonatines). The Student test confirms this tendency, as most variables remain below average for this class: few chords, displacements and pages, simple harmonies (C major or A minor). Yet, the tempo remains lively. Rhythmic difficulties are noticeable on interme diate pieces. They generally feature characteristic rhyth

Figure 3. Variables correlation map

Figure 4. Student test (means comparison)

mic patterns which constitute interesting educational ma terial (e.g. 1 st Arabesque by Debussy). Class 2 contains advanced to virtuoso works (Chopin’s Etude, Ravel’s Toccata), featuring a vivid tempo, large and numerous displacements on the keyboard, a complex harmony and many chords. We also note some borderline individuals (The Little Negro by Debussy, or the 2 nd Gymnopédie by Satie), which could be considered as beginner pieces but still present uncommon harmonic and rhythmic struc tures, thus being hard to classify objectively. Class 3 seems to regroup pieces featuring a left hand playing a “bass+chord” accompaniment (ragtime, waltz, cakewalk). The level of most pieces is intermediate. Indeed, the Stu dent test indicates that despite the high ratio of displace ments and chords, the low tempo and the simplicity of the harmonies compensate for it. As such, this particular class is also representative of specific musical genres. This clustering serves as a complement to the “bounds” approach used in Score Analyzer. 5. SCORE ANALYZER PROTOTYPE The criteria presented in the previous sections have been implemented in a Web application called Score Analyzer 1 (SA). This module is integrated to the @-MUSE platform as a Web service in order to automat ically evaluate a piece level and identify its difficult parts. The SA engine takes any well-formed MusicXML file as input and parses it to extract knowledge exploitable from a performer point of view. Following the scheme we de tailed previously (Figure 1), the context of the piece is briefly analyzed (title, composer) and a few statistics are http://e-piano.univ-reunion.fr/tests/ScoreAnalyser/readScore.php, visited on the 05/06/2012, beta version.

displayed. Then, main parts of the piece are identified, and lastly, difficulty estimations are given for each crite rion, using a mark from 1 (beginner/easy) to 4 (virtuoso). A mean is also calculated to give a global appreciation of the piece difficulty. This allows a better readability of the outputs for musicians. For each criterion, bounds were defined with the help of teachers: for instance, a chord ratio under 10% corresponds to the mark 1, while a dis placement ratio above 20% corresponds to a 4. These bounds determination was transparent for teachers, as they were simply asked to rate each criteria from 1 to 4 on a training corpus. The given marks were then corre lated to the ratio extracted on each piece, in order to cali brate average bounds corresponding to the difficulty le vels felt by musicians. Thus, we notice that most of the criteria do not have a linear distribution, which consti tutes a pianistic reality. The synchronization between both hands is also taken into account. For instance, if each hand obtains a mark of 2 for the displacements crite rion, then the global difficulty mark for this criterion will be 3, as synchronizing both hands will create an addition al difficulty. As such, we define this method as “semi-objective”. Indeed, score level estimation can never be a totally ob jective task: players will judge a piece differently accord ing to their taste, level or background. Therefore, we use two distinct methods to validate SA estimations. The first one consists in confronting it to the clustering obtained through the PCA described in the previous part. This is the “objective” validation. The second one simply con sists in confronting SA results to pianists estimations (“subjective” validation). To facilitate the comparisons, we merged advanced and virtuosi pieces into the same class within SA. The contingencies table (Table 2) allows to better visualize the differences between the PCA and

Figure 5. Individuals projection on the PCA first two axes and corpus details

Score Analyzer’s results. While they seem numerous, on ly one is a major disagreement (3/1 marks on Beethoven Sonata in F). The other distinctions, especially the inter mediate/beginners ones, may be due to the fact that hu mans balance criteria whereas the PCA considers each of them of equal importance. Therefore, we noticed that for pianists, an increase of the displacement ratio raises the piece level much faster than other criteria. Moreover, as stated in the previous part, the clustering given by the PCA is also affected by the musical genre of the piece. Humans do not tend to be affected by this metadata, even if some genres are naturally associated with higher levels (i.e. impressionist or contemporary music). For the “subjective” evaluation, we asked three piano teachers to estimate the difficulty level of each piece by attributing it a mark between 1 and 3. No criteria were imposed. When opinions differ, the final mark is picked according to the majority. The results given in Table 3 show a better correspondence between SA estimations and human ones, which reinforces the “bounds” method defined previously. The main difference consists in unde restimations from SA, especially on advanced pieces. In deed, pianists also take expression and musicality diffi culties into account, while our system only consider tech nical difficulties. Therefore, this study leads us to pursue our work by expanding the set of criteria to improve our estimations.

6. CONCLUSION In this paper, we proposed an automatic Score Analyzer to determine the difficulty level of piano pieces. This pro totype is based on seven criteria characterizing technical features of a piano piece: playing speed, fingerings, hands displacements, polyphony, harmony, rhythm and length. We thus proposed methods to extract these criteria from a MusicXML scores, and realized a PCA to validate them. This analysis permitted to establish three classes among a corpus of fifty selected piano pieces. These classes were then confronted to Score Analyzer estimations, which are tuned according to piano teachers expertise. Improvements on this work include the integration of fingering related difficulties, but also the adaptation to students levels. Indeed, the sense of difficulty within a musical work is mostly dependent from the musician’s background. We thus imagine a weighting system to per sonalize our analysis. We also intend to implement local analysis (by measures) in order to identify specific diffi cult parts. The criteria decomposition would then allow to extract the main cause of the difficulty and thus link it to an annotation created on the @-MUSE platform. Other perspectives include integration of “expressive” criteria (emotions, nuances, rubato, attacks), as well as adapta tions and tests on scores for different instruments. 7. REFERENCES [1] V. Sébastien, D. Sébastien, N. Conruyt, "Constituting a Musical Sign Base through Score Analysis and Annotation", International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, No 3&4, pp. 386-398, 2011. [2] M. A. Winget: “Annotations on musical scores by performing musicians: Collaborative models, interactive methods, and music digital library tool development”, Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 2008. [3] G. Castan, M. Good, and P. Roland: “Extensible Markup Language (XML) for Music Applications: An Introduction”, The Virtual Score: Representation, Retrieval, Restoration, MIT Press, pp. 95-102, 2001. [4] M. W. Camp: Teaching piano: the synthesis of mind, ear and body, Alfred Music Publishing, 1992. [5] O. Lartillot: “Une analyse musicale automatique suivant une heuristique perceptive”, 3ème Conférence Internationale Francophone sur l’Extraction et la Gestion des Connaissances, EGC 03, Lyon, 2003. [6] Y. Raimond, S. Abdallah, M. Sandler, and F. Giasson: “The Music Ontology”, Proceedings of the International Conference on Music Information Retrieval, ISMIR, 2007. [7] P. Rigaux: “Neuma Ontology Specification”, Project Neuma Report, Lamsade-CNRS, ANR-08, 2008. [8] C.-C. Lin: “An Intelligent Virtual Piano Tutor”, National Chung Cheng University 2006. [9] A. Al Kasimi, E. Nichols, and C. Raphael, “A simple algorithm for automatic generation of polyphonic piano fingerings”: 8th International Conference on Music Information Retrieval, Vienna, 2007. [10] R. Parncutt, J. A. Sloboda, M. Raekallio, E. F. Clarke, and P. Desain: “An Ergonomic Model of Keyboard Fingering for Melodic Fragments”, Music Perception: An Interdisciplinary Journal, Vol. 14, No. 4, 1997, pp. 341-382. [11] J. H. Ward: “Hierarchical Grouping to Optimize an Objective Function”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, No. 48, pp. 236–244, 1963.

Table 3. Contingencies table between SA and teachers marks

Table 2. Contingencies table between SA and PCA marks

